---
date: 2019-08-08T22:42:09.000+00:00
title: On Accessing & Exchanging Personal Health Information
author: Abraham Nash
hero_image: "/content/images/o.png"

---
Accessing personal health information (PHI) is currently a laborious task for a lot of patients across many different countries, regions and localities — this is owed to the institutional implementation of centralised identity architectures, employed by many different providers in the healthcare sector. The focus of these articles is not on any particular health care system. Though, for example, the requesting of access to personal health information can currently take up to [60 days (HIPAA)](https://privacyrights.org/consumer-guides/hipaa-privacy-rule-patients-rights) by law [ in the USA](https://privacyrights.org/consumer-guides/hipaa-privacy-rule-patients-rights).  

A patient can visit one provider where their PHI is recorded in one EHR, and, when the patient chooses (or must) visit another provider, they often find they cannot retrieve their PHI. As a result, lab test results, clinical documentation and previous hospital visits are not always communicated. This can lead to ineffective care, inefficient use of patient and physician time and resources, the duplication of treatment and tests, and at worst can cause harm to patients if there were important and undocumented components of their care to consider (e.g. previous treatments, allergies to medications).

As a proposed solution, patients have in the past decade been provided with access to their personal health information which is held by the healthcare provider in siloed (centralized) databases. This is owned by the provider using a centralised identity architecture which leads to the permissions of access being controlled by the institution — it then leads to institutions "owning" personal healthcare information. The word "own" is also a slight misrepresentation of context as it diverts the focus away from solution finding, to policy adaptation (without a solution in-hand).

A partnership between healthcare institutions and large EHR providers emerged as we transitioned to digital health records. Centralised identity architectures and ownership of this personal health information is now utilised to preserve shareholding in healthcare institutions. Personal health information is seen as an institutional asset to the institutional healhtcare provider as this in part defines the very nature of their existence, as I write about here \[A Decomposition of the Healthcare Institution\].

Therefore, despite the great variety of HIE solutions which have arisen to enhance the ability for data-exchange between differing HIE providers, it is not surprising that institutional healthcare providers have found it difficult to meet the needs of security and health information exchange (HIE) networks. Any attempt to overcome the inability large electronic health records to exchange health information, who utilize centralized identity architectures, is ignoring the underlying incentives of these organizational structures wich keeps them in place. As stakeholders, the current solutions are therefore trying to bring pieces of a jigsaw puzzle  which will not fit together.

This proposed solutions which arise out of centralized identity providers is a tactful play on the misunderstanding of personal health information ownership — whilst "data-access" is provided to an individual, it still stores health information in a siloed database and uses a centralized identity architecture. Therefore, the same issues of "data-exchange"remain unresolved and an act to divert attention away from the issue at hand remains. As a strategic institutional asset, it is not in the interests to exchange data and companies who specialise in health information. However, like all things which realise themselves, we do a full circle to come back-around and realise that the solution is  found in "data-access".

Adrian Gropper is the first to have designed a fundamental re-understanding of personal health information holding in healthcare provision — an architecture of data holding inverses the centralized identity architecture into a decentralized identity architecture (DID). This re-structuring centres the identity on an individual (sovereign) patients identity (of which there are many) , rather than the provider (of which there is one identity). Adrian's [white paper](https://www.healthit.gov/sites/default/files/7-29-poweringthephysician-patientrelationshipwithblockchainhealthit.pdf), HIE of One, clearly outlines his understanding on the matter — and it holds the keys to which decentralized health care provision can be built. Adrian also demonstrates this architecture in practice which is centred on the concept of the sovereign individual (both physician and patient) who uses their decentralized identities in the setup of healthcare provision.

A blockhain-based DID solution  naturally replaces a service-centric model with a user-centric model. DIDs are modelled to build single, unique personal identity profiles that include a collection of verifiable and traceable issuance's of credentials. This model would free patients from having to answer repeated questions during their medical visits or request access to new patient portals when transitioning between various points of care. It would also alleviate providers' workload by expediting the identity verification and decrease patient mismatch rate due to similar or inconsistent identifiers. Moreover, it can protect patient privacy by allowing them to regain ownership of their identity.

This is important because it re-wires the flow of information which is now controlled by the patient. An open-source personal health record (NOSH) is accessed via policies that are determined by the patient server. Healthcare mostly occurs when a physician records information into a patients health record. To engage, a physician authenticates their professional identities through attributing their professional credentials with a self-sovereign blockchain (ethereum) based identity. A physician can then use their validated DID and request access to a patients health record in the setup of healthcare through an  API portal. A patient holds their personal health information in any store they like (e.g. laptop, mobile phone) and accepts or denies the request to access in the provision of healthcare.

However, the ability to accept or decline a physicians access to patient health information is not the empowering aspect of this architecture. Instead, it is that the personal health information is being recorded into the "patients" store under the identity of that patient. A  patient can can interact with any healthcare services they wish, without their personal health information being utilised to discourage them from seeking other providers of healthcare services.

So why else are siloed databases of PHI held under centralized identity architectures not the answer to storing data? The current issues are that up to 50,000 staff in a hospital network can rely on having access to a single EHR system or delivery network for over 5-10 million patients. Subsequently, a providers privacy and security standards for consent, authorisation, single-sign-on, and accounting of disclosures are proving more and more elusive. Secondly, patient identification has been an integral part to the delivery of safe and effective healthcare services. For example, in the US today many patient identities are managed and resolved through proprietary systems such as the Master Patient Index (MPI) and Enterprise Patient Master Index (EPMI). These systems have implemented sophisticated algorithms to locate or match an existing patient with a set of identifying information obtained from the patient during each visit. However, inconsistencies in patient identifiers, errors in data entries, and similarities between patients in a large hospital database (e.g., identical or similar names, discrepant formats of date of birth, etc) complicate the identifications process and exacerbate patient mismatching, compromising the quality of care and also potentially contributing to incorrect fulfilment of medications. According to a previous study, ten out of 17 medical errors that contribute to approximately 195,000 deaths per year are related to incorrect identifications of patients.

Healthcare organizations usually assign their patients with unique patient identifiers, but those identifiers are often unrecognized by other organizations. As a patient moves from one care provider to another, their established profile from the previous provider cannot be easily transferred to the new provider, with each occurrence posing an increased change for error in patient databases such as the {MPI}. This further exposes the exact problems of centralized identity management and their negative impact in the long run.